Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the opioids.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the opioids. Define the terms and outline how the class is
classified.
An opioid is any substance, natural or synthetic, that acts at opioid receptors,
while an opiate refers strictly to the natural alkaloids derived from opium,
such as morphine and codeine; opioid is the broader and now preferred term.
The class is classified in two main ways.
By origin: naturally occurring alkaloids such as morphine and codeine;
semisynthetic derivatives such as diamorphine, oxycodone and buprenorphine;
and synthetic agents such as the fentanyl family, pethidine, methadone and tramadol.
By their action at the receptor: full agonists such as morphine and fentanyl;
partial agonists such as buprenorphine;
agonist-antagonists such as nalbuphine and pentazocine;
and pure antagonists such as naloxone and naltrexone.
This dual classification by source and by receptor action organises a large and
important group of drugs.
Describe the opioid receptors and the mechanism of action.
Opioids act at receptors of which the principal types are the mu,
kappa and delta receptors — now also termed MOP,
KOP and DOP — together with the related nociceptin receptor;
the mu receptor mediates most of the clinically important analgesia and also the
respiratory depression, euphoria and dependence.
All are G-protein-coupled receptors, acting through inhibitory G proteins.
Their activation reduces adenylate cyclase activity and so cyclic AMP,
opens potassium channels causing hyperpolarisation,
and closes voltage-gated calcium channels reducing neurotransmitter release.
The net effect, acting both pre-synaptically to reduce the release of excitatory
transmitters and post-synaptically to hyperpolarise the neurone,
is to reduce neuronal excitability and the transmission of nociceptive information.
This is the molecular basis of opioid analgesia and of the other receptor-mediated
effects.
Where in the nervous system do opioids act to produce analgesia?
Opioids act at several levels of the pain pathway.
In the spinal cord they act at the dorsal horn,
both pre-synaptically on the central terminals of nociceptive afferents to reduce
transmitter release and post-synaptically on the second-order neurones,
inhibiting the transmission of nociceptive signals — the basis of the action of
neuraxial opioids.
Supraspinally they act in the brainstem,
particularly the periaqueductal grey and rostral ventromedial medulla,
activating descending inhibitory pathways that modulate spinal nociception,
and in higher centres they alter the affective response to pain.
There are also peripheral opioid receptors on sensory nerves,
upregulated in inflammation, which contribute to analgesia.
So opioids modulate pain at peripheral, spinal and supraspinal sites simultaneously.
What are the endogenous opioids?
The body has its own endogenous opioid peptides,
the natural ligands for these receptors,
which form three main families derived from precursor proteins: the endorphins,
principally beta-endorphin from pro-opiomelanocortin;
the enkephalins from proenkephalin; and the dynorphins from prodynorphin;
with the related nociceptin system.
These peptides are released within the central nervous system and periphery and act
at the opioid receptors to modulate pain, mood, stress and other functions,
mediating, for instance, stress-induced analgesia.
Their existence explains why the receptors are present at all,
and the exogenous opioid drugs act, in effect,
by mimicking these endogenous ligands at the same receptors.
Understanding them frames the opioids as drugs acting on a pre-existing
physiological pain-modulating system.
Take me through the major effects of opioids,
beginning with analgesia and respiratory depression.
Analgesia is the principal effect, opioids being effective against moderate to
severe pain, particularly continuous, dull, visceral pain,
and altering both the sensation and the affective experience of pain.
Respiratory depression is the most dangerous effect:
opioids reduce the sensitivity of the brainstem respiratory centres to carbon
dioxide, so that ventilation falls,
the response to a rising carbon dioxide is blunted, and the rate slows,
progressing to apnoea in overdose; this is the usual mechanism of opioid death,
is potentiated by other depressants,
and is the effect that must be monitored and is reversed by naloxone.
These two effects — the wanted analgesia and the feared respiratory depression —
are both mediated chiefly by the mu receptor and so are difficult to separate,
which is the central challenge of opioid therapy.
Continue with the other central and gastrointestinal effects.
Centrally, opioids cause sedation and, in some, euphoria,
which contributes to their misuse; miosis,
through stimulation of the oculomotor nucleus,
giving the pinpoint pupils of opioid effect and overdose;
depression of the cough reflex, exploited as an antitussive;
and nausea and vomiting through stimulation of the chemoreceptor trigger zone,
common particularly on initiation.
They can cause muscle rigidity, including chest-wall rigidity with rapid high-dose
potent opioids, which can impair ventilation.
In the gastrointestinal tract they reduce motility and secretions,
delaying gastric emptying and causing constipation,
to which tolerance does not develop,
and they increase tone in the sphincter of Oddi and biliary pressure.
So beyond analgesia and respiratory depression,
opioids produce a characteristic set of central and gastrointestinal effects.
And the cardiovascular, urinary and other effects?
Cardiovascularly opioids are relatively stable,
which is why they are valued in balanced anaesthesia,
but they can cause bradycardia through vagal stimulation,
and vasodilatation and hypotension,
partly through histamine release with morphine and pethidine and partly through
reduced sympathetic tone.
They cause urinary retention through effects on the bladder and sphincter.
They cause pruritus, particularly with neuraxial administration,
through central and histamine-related mechanisms.
With chronic use they suppress the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal and adrenal axes,
causing hypogonadism and other endocrine effects,
and they modulate immune function. Histamine release with morphine and pethidine
can cause urticaria, bronchospasm and hypotension.
So the opioids have a wide range of effects beyond the central ones,
several of which — retention, pruritus,
the endocrine effects — are clinically troublesome.
Explain tolerance, dependence and opioid-induced hyperalgesia.
Tolerance is the need for increasing doses to maintain the same effect,
developing with repeated use through receptor and signalling adaptations;
it develops to analgesia, euphoria and respiratory depression but, importantly,
not to constipation or miosis.
Physical dependence is a state in which abrupt cessation or antagonism precipitates
a withdrawal syndrome — agitation, autonomic overactivity, pain,
gastrointestinal disturbance — and is distinct from addiction, the compulsive,
harmful drug-seeking behaviour.
Opioid-induced hyperalgesia is a paradoxical state in which opioids increase
sensitivity to pain, through pronociceptive adaptations including
N-methyl-D-aspartate-mediated central sensitisation,
so that more opioid produces more pain;
it is a reason that escalating doses sometimes fail and that adjuncts such as
ketamine help.
These phenomena complicate long-term opioid therapy and underlie much of the
current concern about opioids.
Describe the pharmacology of morphine.
Morphine is the prototypical opioid,
a naturally occurring phenanthrene alkaloid and a full mu agonist used as the
standard against which others are compared.
It is relatively hydrophilic, so its onset after intravenous injection is slower
than the lipophilic opioids and its central effect is somewhat delayed.
It is metabolised by glucuronidation to morphine-three-glucuronide,
which is inactive as an analgesic and may be excitatory,
and morphine-six-glucuronide, a potent active opioid more potent than morphine
itself; both are renally excreted, so morphine-six-glucuronide accumulates in renal
impairment, prolonging and deepening the effect and risking respiratory depression.
Morphine causes histamine release, with vasodilatation, hypotension and pruritus.
So morphine is an effective, cheap standard opioid whose key caveats are the
renally cleared active metabolite and histamine release.
Now the fentanyl family — fentanyl itself first.
Fentanyl is a synthetic, highly lipophilic phenylpiperidine mu agonist,
around a hundred times more potent than morphine.
Its high lipid solubility gives a rapid onset and, after a single dose,
a short duration by redistribution,
making it ideal for intraoperative analgesia and for blunting the response to
laryngoscopy.
However, with repeated doses or infusion it accumulates in the tissues,
so its context-sensitive half-time rises markedly and recovery is prolonged after
prolonged administration.
It is metabolised in the liver to inactive metabolites,
so it lacks morphine's problematic active metabolite and is safer in renal
impairment. It is available transdermally as a patch for chronic pain,
giving sustained delivery, and transmucosally for breakthrough pain.
So fentanyl is a potent, rapidly acting opioid whose accumulation on infusion is
its main kinetic limitation.
Contrast alfentanil and remifentanil with fentanyl.
Alfentanil is less potent and less lipophilic than fentanyl but has a low pKa,
so that a large fraction is un-ionised at body pH and it has a small volume of
distribution, giving it a very rapid onset and a short,
predictable duration after a bolus, useful for brief intense stimuli.
Remifentanil is the outstanding member:
an ester-linked opioid metabolised by non-specific plasma and tissue esterases,
independently of hepatic and renal function,
so that it has an ultra-short action and, uniquely,
a context-sensitive half-time that remains short and constant however long it is
infused — it does not accumulate.
This makes remifentanil ideal for titratable intraoperative analgesia and for
situations needing rapid offset, the trade-off being that analgesia ceases almost
immediately on stopping, so alternative analgesia must be established before
emergence, and acute tolerance and hyperalgesia can occur.
Tell me about pethidine and its particular problems.
Pethidine, also called meperidine, is a synthetic phenylpiperidine mu agonist,
less potent than morphine, with a more rapid onset and a structure giving it mild
atropine-like and local-anaesthetic properties;
it was once used for its supposed advantage in biliary and ureteric colic,
now disputed.
Its particular problems are several. It is metabolised to norpethidine,
a neurotoxic, proconvulsant metabolite that accumulates with repeated dosing and in
renal impairment, causing tremor, agitation and seizures.
It has anticholinergic effects, causing tachycardia.
And it interacts dangerously with monoamine oxidase inhibitors,
precipitating a life-threatening excitatory or serotonergic reaction,
so it is contraindicated with them.
For these reasons — the neurotoxic metabolite, the interactions,
and no clear advantage — pethidine has largely fallen out of favour.
Describe codeine and tramadol, with their dependence on metabolism.
Codeine is a weak opioid that is essentially a prodrug:
it has little intrinsic activity and depends on metabolism by the polymorphic
enzyme CYP2D6 to morphine for its analgesic effect,
so poor metabolisers gain little analgesia while ultra-rapid metabolisers convert
it rapidly to morphine with a risk of toxicity,
which has caused deaths in children and breastfed infants and led to restrictions
on its use in these groups.
Tramadol is a synthetic agent with a dual mechanism — a weak opioid action,
partly through an active metabolite formed by CYP2D6,
and inhibition of serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake — giving analgesia with less
respiratory depression and constipation but a risk of serotonin syndrome,
especially with other serotonergic drugs, and of seizures,
and it too is affected by CYP2D6 polymorphism.
So both illustrate the clinical importance of pharmacogenetic variation in opioid
metabolism.
Explain buprenorphine and methadone.
Buprenorphine is a semisynthetic partial mu agonist with very high receptor
affinity and slow dissociation.
Being a partial agonist it has a ceiling to its effects,
including respiratory depression, which confers a degree of safety,
but its high affinity means it can displace and block full agonists and that its
effects are only partially reversed by naloxone.
It is long-acting, used transdermally and sublingually for pain and,
with its ceiling and blocking properties, for opioid-dependence treatment.
Methadone is a synthetic, long-acting full mu agonist that is also an
N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist and a serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor,
useful in difficult and neuropathic pain and in opioid-dependence maintenance;
its long and variable half-life makes dose conversion hazardous and prone to
accumulation, and it prolongs the QT interval, risking arrhythmia.
Both are valuable but require particular care.
What are the agonist-antagonists and the antagonists?
The agonist-antagonists, such as nalbuphine and pentazocine,
act as agonists at one receptor type, typically kappa,
and as antagonists or partial agonists at the mu receptor,
giving analgesia with a ceiling on respiratory depression but also a ceiling on
analgesia, dysphoria through kappa activation,
and the ability to precipitate withdrawal in opioid-dependent patients.
The pure antagonists block the receptors without activating them:
naloxone is a short-acting intravenous antagonist used to reverse opioid overdose
and respiratory depression, with the caveat that its short half-life relative to
most opioids risks re-narcotisation;
naltrexone is a longer-acting oral antagonist used in dependence and alcohol
treatment; and the peripherally acting antagonists, such as methylnaltrexone,
block the gastrointestinal effects of opioids,
treating opioid-induced constipation,
without crossing into the brain to reverse analgesia.
So antagonists range from emergency reversal to targeted treatment of peripheral
effects.
How are opioids administered, and what is special about the neuraxial route?
Opioids are given by many routes: orally,
including modified-release preparations for chronic pain; intravenously,
including by patient-controlled analgesia; intramuscularly and subcutaneously;
transdermally, as fentanyl and buprenorphine patches; transmucosally;
and neuraxially, into the epidural or subarachnoid space.
The neuraxial route exploits the spinal opioid receptors directly,
giving profound analgesia from small doses.
Its behaviour depends on lipophilicity:
a lipophilic opioid such as fentanyl acts quickly, segmentally and briefly,
with rapid systemic absorption; a hydrophilic opioid such as morphine spreads more
widely in the cerebrospinal fluid, giving prolonged,
extensive analgesia but with a risk of delayed respiratory depression as it spreads
rostrally to the brainstem hours after administration,
which mandates prolonged monitoring.
So the neuraxial route is powerful but demands awareness of the delayed respiratory
depression with hydrophilic agents.
Discuss patient-controlled analgesia and equianalgesic conversion.
Patient-controlled analgesia allows the patient to self-administer small
intravenous bolus doses of an opioid within preset dose and lockout limits,
titrating analgesia to their own need and avoiding the peaks and troughs of
intermittent dosing, with safety from the lockout and from the fact that an
oversedated patient stops demanding.
It is widely used for acute postoperative pain.
Equianalgesic conversion is the process of changing between opioids or routes using
tables of approximately equivalent doses,
necessary because the agents differ greatly in potency and because oral and
parenteral doses differ; it is done cautiously,
reducing the calculated dose to allow for incomplete cross-tolerance and individual
variation, and titrating.
Both are everyday tools: patient-controlled analgesia for safe self-titration,
and equianalgesic conversion for safely switching agents and routes.
How would you manage opioid-induced respiratory depression?
I would recognise it from a falling respiratory rate and conscious level,
hypoxaemia and pinpoint pupils, and respond urgently.
I would support the airway, give oxygen and assist or take over ventilation,
which alone is often sufficient.
I would give naloxone, the specific antagonist, in titrated intravenous increments,
aiming to restore adequate ventilation without fully reversing analgesia and
precipitating pain, agitation or withdrawal in the dependent patient.
Crucially, because naloxone's duration is shorter than that of most opioids,
I would observe the patient for re-narcotisation as it wears off,
repeating doses or starting an infusion as needed,
particularly after long-acting or modified-release opioids.
I would seek the cause, review the prescription, and prevent recurrence.
So the management is airway and ventilation first, titrated naloxone,
and vigilance for recurrence.
What is the role of opioids within modern multimodal and opioid-sparing strategies?
Opioids remain central to the management of moderate to severe acute and cancer
pain, but the recognition of their adverse effects,
their contribution to chronic postoperative opioid use,
and the wider harms of overprescription have shifted practice towards using them as
one component of multimodal analgesia rather than the sole agent.
Multimodal analgesia combines drugs and techniques acting by different mechanisms —
paracetamol, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, local and regional anaesthesia,
ketamine, alpha-two agonists and others — to provide additive or synergistic
analgesia while reducing the opioid dose and its side-effects,
a principle embedded in enhanced-recovery pathways.
Opioid-sparing and, for selected procedures,
opioid-free anaesthesia aim to minimise opioid exposure.
So the modern role of opioids is as a powerful but judiciously used component of a
multimodal strategy, not as a default.
How does opioid choice change in renal and hepatic impairment?
In renal impairment I would avoid or greatly reduce morphine,
because its active metabolite morphine-six-glucuronide accumulates and causes
prolonged respiratory depression, and I would avoid pethidine because of its
proconvulsant metabolite norpethidine; I would prefer fentanyl or its relatives,
which have inactive metabolites, or remifentanil,
whose esterase metabolism is independent of renal function, titrating carefully.
In hepatic impairment the metabolism of most opioids is reduced and their sedative
effects may precipitate encephalopathy,
so doses are reduced and the patient monitored; remifentanil, again,
is handled independently of the liver.
The general principle is to choose, in organ failure,
the opioids without renally or hepatically dependent active metabolites and to
titrate to effect, with remifentanil the most predictable in both forms of organ
failure.
Pull it together: how do you use opioids safely and effectively?
I would use opioids for their genuine power against moderate to severe pain,
choosing the agent and route to suit the situation — a rapidly acting potent opioid
such as fentanyl or remifentanil intraoperatively, titrated and, for remifentanil,
with longer-acting analgesia established before its offset;
morphine or oxycodone for postoperative pain,
often by patient-controlled analgesia;
and appropriate agents for chronic and cancer pain.
I would match the choice to organ function,
avoiding morphine and pethidine in renal failure and preferring agents without
active renally-cleared metabolites. I would embed opioids within multimodal,
opioid-sparing analgesia to limit their dose and harms.
I would monitor for and be ready to treat respiratory depression with airway
support and titrated naloxone, mindful of re-narcotisation.
And I would respect their tolerance, dependence and addiction potential,
using the lowest effective dose for the shortest necessary time.
So they are indispensable but used with discipline and within a broader strategy.
Relate the structures of the main opioid groups to their properties.
The opioids fall into several structural groups that broadly track their properties.
The phenanthrenes, the morphine-related alkaloids including morphine,
codeine and the semisynthetic oxycodone and buprenorphine,
tend to cause more histamine release and have the metabolic features of the
morphine group.
The phenylpiperidines, including the synthetic fentanyl family, alfentanil,
sufentanil and remifentanil, and pethidine, are typically highly lipophilic,
rapid in onset, potent and free of significant histamine release.
The diphenylheptanes, such as methadone, are long-acting.
These structural distinctions are not absolute but they help in understanding why,
for instance, the fentanyl group is fast and clean haemodynamically while the
morphine group releases histamine, and they organise the agents alongside the
functional classification by receptor action.
Describe diamorphine and the morphine-related agents oxycodone and hydromorphone.
Diamorphine, or heroin, is a semisynthetic diacetylated morphine that is more
lipophilic than morphine, giving it a rapid onset and good central penetration,
and it is itself a prodrug, deacetylated to the active monoacetylmorphine and
morphine; it is used in some countries for acute and palliative pain and is valued
for its high solubility allowing small-volume injection.
Oxycodone is a semisynthetic mu agonist,
somewhat more potent than morphine orally with good oral bioavailability,
widely used for acute and chronic pain,
with metabolism by cytochrome enzymes and active metabolites.
Hydromorphone is a potent semisynthetic mu agonist used where a strong opioid is
needed, including by patient-controlled analgesia,
with no troublesome active metabolite of the morphine-six-glucuronide kind.
So these agents offer alternatives to morphine with differing potency,
bioavailability and metabolite profiles.
Tell me about sufentanil.
Sufentanil is a synthetic phenylpiperidine of the fentanyl family,
the most potent of the clinically used opioids,
several times more potent than fentanyl and many times more potent than morphine.
It is highly lipophilic, with a rapid onset,
and is metabolised to inactive products.
Like fentanyl it accumulates less than might be expected because of a relatively
favourable context-sensitive half-time,
and it has been used for cardiac and other major anaesthesia and neuraxially.
A sublingual preparation has been developed for acute pain.
Its extreme potency demands accurate dosing.
It is less used in some countries than fentanyl and remifentanil but is valued
where a very potent, lipophilic opioid is wanted,
illustrating the range of potency within the single phenylpiperidine family.
Explain the concept of context-sensitive half-time as it applies to the opioids.
The context-sensitive half-time is the time for the plasma concentration to fall by
half after stopping an infusion that has maintained a steady concentration,
and it depends on the duration of the infusion — the context — because tissue
stores fill over time and then must empty.
It matters greatly for the opioids. Fentanyl has a short context-sensitive
half-time after a brief infusion but a markedly rising one after prolonged
infusion, as its large tissue stores must release,
so recovery is increasingly delayed the longer it is given.
Remifentanil is the striking exception:
because it is destroyed by esterases as fast as it is delivered,
its context-sensitive half-time stays short and constant however long it is
infused, so recovery is rapid regardless of duration.
So the concept explains why remifentanil offers uniquely predictable,
duration-independent offset where the other opioids accumulate.
Describe opioid-induced muscle rigidity and its management.
Opioid-induced muscle rigidity, classically chest-wall or truncal rigidity,
occurs with rapid administration of high doses of the potent lipophilic opioids
such as fentanyl, sufentanil and remifentanil.
It is a centrally mediated increase in muscle tone that can make the chest wall and
glottis so stiff that ventilation by mask becomes difficult or impossible,
an alarming situation at induction. It is more likely with rapid injection and
large doses.
It is prevented by avoiding rapid high-dose bolus administration and is managed,
if it occurs, by deepening anaesthesia and, crucially,
by giving a neuromuscular blocking drug to relax the muscles and allow ventilation;
an opioid antagonist would also reverse it but at the cost of the analgesia.
So awareness of this effect, cautious dosing,
and readiness to paralyse and ventilate are the key points.
What are the effects of opioids on the biliary tract and the sphincter of Oddi?
Opioids increase the tone of the sphincter of Oddi and raise pressure in the
biliary tract, which can cause or mimic biliary colic and can interfere with the
interpretation of cholangiography during biliary surgery.
This effect was the basis of the old teaching that pethidine was preferable to
morphine in biliary and pancreatic pain on the grounds that it raised biliary
pressure less, although the evidence for a clinically meaningful difference between
the opioids is weak and all of them raise sphincter tone to some degree.
If opioid-induced biliary spasm is problematic,
it can be relieved by an opioid antagonist such as naloxone or by smooth-muscle
relaxants such as glucagon or glyceryl trinitrate.
So the biliary effect is a recognised,
occasionally relevant action of the class rather than a strong basis for choosing
between agents.
Which opioids release histamine, and what are the consequences?
Histamine release is characteristic of the morphine group,
principally morphine itself and also pethidine and, among older drugs, codeine,
occurring through a direct, non-immunological action on mast cells.
The consequences are cutaneous — flushing,
urticaria and itching along the vein — and systemic, with vasodilatation,
hypotension and, occasionally, bronchospasm,
which can be significant with rapid or large intravenous doses and in the
haemodynamically vulnerable.
The synthetic phenylpiperidines — fentanyl, alfentanil,
sufentanil and remifentanil — do not cause significant histamine release,
which is one reason they are preferred for cardiovascular stability in anaesthesia.
So where histamine release and its haemodynamic consequences matter,
a fentanyl-family opioid is chosen over morphine,
and rapid large boluses of morphine are avoided.
Discuss the use of opioids in cancer pain and the WHO analgesic ladder.
Cancer pain is managed using the World Health Organization analgesic ladder,
a stepwise approach that begins with non-opioid analgesics such as paracetamol and
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for mild pain,
adds a weak opioid such as codeine for mild to moderate pain,
and moves to a strong opioid such as morphine for moderate to severe pain,
at each step combined with non-opioids and with adjuvants such as antidepressants,
anticonvulsants and steroids for neuropathic and specific pains.
For chronic cancer pain, strong opioids are given regularly by the clock in
modified-release form, with immediate-release opioid for breakthrough pain,
and the dose is titrated to effect without an arbitrary ceiling,
since dependence and addiction are secondary concerns in this setting.
So opioids are central and used liberally but rationally in cancer pain,
within a structured, multimodal framework.
Give some practical opioid conversions and their cautions.
Conversions rest on approximate equianalgesic equivalents and must be done
cautiously. Oral morphine is roughly two to three times less potent than parenteral
morphine, so oral doses are correspondingly higher than intravenous.
Oral oxycodone is roughly one-and-a-half to two times as potent as oral morphine.
Codeine and tramadol are about a tenth as potent as morphine.
When switching between strong opioids,
the calculated equianalgesic dose is reduced, commonly by a quarter to a half,
to allow for incomplete cross-tolerance and individual variation,
and then titrated to effect with breakthrough doses available.
Methadone is especially hazardous to convert because of its long,
variable half-life and non-linear potency,
and is best managed by those experienced with it.
So conversion uses equivalence tables but always with a safety reduction and
careful titration, never as a precise arithmetic.
Describe the pharmacokinetics of transdermal fentanyl and buprenorphine.
Transdermal patches provide sustained,
controlled delivery of a lipophilic opioid through the skin,
useful for stable chronic pain.
The fentanyl patch establishes a depot in the skin from which the drug is absorbed,
so there is a delay of many hours — around twelve to twenty-four — before
therapeutic concentrations are reached after application,
and a similar delay before concentrations fall after removal,
which means the patch is unsuitable for acute or rapidly changing pain and that
overdose, once present, persists after removal.
Buprenorphine patches behave similarly, delivering the partial agonist over days.
Fever, heat and broken skin increase absorption and risk toxicity.
So transdermal opioids suit stable pain in the opioid-tolerant patient,
with the important cautions of slow onset and offset and of the persistence of
effect after removal.
Detail the use of naloxone, including dosing and infusion.
Naloxone is a pure competitive opioid antagonist given to reverse opioid-induced
respiratory depression and overdose.
In the perioperative setting it is titrated in small intravenous increments — of
the order of tens of micrograms at a time — to restore adequate ventilation while
preserving as much analgesia as possible and avoiding the abrupt full reversal that
precipitates pain, agitation, hypertension, tachycardia and,
in the dependent patient, acute withdrawal.
In overdose larger doses are given, by intravenous,
intramuscular or intranasal routes,
the last used by first responders and in community take-home programmes.
Because naloxone's duration of action, around twenty to thirty minutes,
is shorter than that of most opioids, re-narcotisation is a real danger,
so the patient is observed and repeated doses or a continuous infusion given,
particularly after long-acting or modified-release opioids.
So naloxone is titrated, and vigilance for recurrence maintained.
How variable is the individual response to opioids, and why?
The response to opioids varies greatly between individuals,
in both efficacy and adverse effects, for several reasons.
Pharmacogenetic variation is important:
polymorphism of the CYP2D6 enzyme determines the conversion of codeine and tramadol
to their active forms, so that poor metabolisers gain little analgesia and
ultra-rapid metabolisers risk toxicity;
variation in the mu-receptor gene and in transporters and other enzymes also
contributes.
Tolerance from prior exposure greatly alters requirement.
Age, organ function, pain mechanism,
and psychological and contextual factors all modify the response.
The practical consequence is that opioids cannot be dosed by a fixed formula but
must be titrated to the individual patient's effect,
starting cautiously in the opioid-naive, the elderly and the organ-impaired,
and recognising that codeine and tramadol are unreliable because of the genetic
variation in their activation.
What is acute opioid tolerance with remifentanil, and how is it addressed?
Remifentanil, and to some extent the other potent opioids,
can produce an acute tolerance and an opioid-induced hyperalgesia during a single
anaesthetic, particularly with high-dose infusions,
so that the patient requires more opioid for the same effect and may emerge with
heightened pain sensitivity, manifesting as greater than expected postoperative
pain and opioid requirement.
It is thought to involve N-methyl-D-aspartate-mediated central sensitisation.
It is addressed by avoiding unnecessarily high remifentanil infusion rates,
by establishing effective longer-acting and multimodal analgesia before the
remifentanil is stopped, and by using adjuncts that counter the underlying
sensitisation, notably ketamine, an N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist,
and other multimodal agents.
So the very potency and clean offset of remifentanil carry this trade-off,
which is managed by measured dosing and by planning the transition to postoperative
analgesia.
What are the endocrine and immune effects of long-term opioids?
Long-term opioid use has effects beyond analgesia and the familiar side-effects.
They suppress the hypothalamic-pituitary axes,
reducing the secretion of gonadotrophins and so of sex hormones,
causing hypogonadism with reduced libido, fatigue, infertility and, over time,
reduced bone density, and they can blunt the cortisol axis.
They modulate the immune system, with chronic use associated with some
immunosuppression, the clinical significance of which is debated.
These effects, together with tolerance, dependence,
hyperalgesia and the well-known constipation,
form part of the growing recognition that long-term opioid therapy for chronic
non-cancer pain often does more harm than good,
and they are among the reasons for the move to limit chronic opioid prescribing and
to favour multimodal and non-pharmacological approaches to persistent pain.
Comment on the opioid crisis and opioid stewardship.
The opioid crisis refers to the epidemic of harm, including dependence,
addiction and death, that followed the large increase in opioid prescribing for
chronic non-cancer pain, driven by overoptimistic claims of safety,
and the subsequent spread to illicit and synthetic opioids;
it has been most severe in North America but is a wider concern.
The recognition that opioids are often ineffective and harmful in chronic
non-cancer pain, and that surgical prescribing contributes to new long-term use,
has prompted opioid stewardship: prescribing the lowest effective dose for the
shortest necessary time, embedding opioids within multimodal analgesia,
avoiding routine large take-home supplies after surgery,
identifying and supporting those at risk, and providing naloxone where appropriate.
So the modern use of opioids is framed by stewardship,
balancing their indispensable role in acute and cancer pain against the serious
harms revealed by the crisis.
How are opioids used in obstetrics, and what are the concerns for the neonate?
Opioids are used in obstetrics for labour analgesia and as part of anaesthesia,
but with particular regard for the fetus and neonate.
Opioids cross the placenta readily,
so systemic opioids given to the labouring mother can depress the neonate's
respiration at birth, the risk depending on the agent,
dose and timing relative to delivery; pethidine, long used in labour,
crosses the placenta and its long-acting metabolite norpethidine can accumulate in
the neonate, causing sedation and respiratory depression,
which is one reason for the move towards alternatives such as remifentanil
patient-controlled analgesia, whose rapid maternal metabolism limits fetal exposure.
A depressed neonate is supported and, if necessary, given naloxone.
Neuraxial opioids, in low doses combined with local anaesthetic,
give excellent maternal analgesia with little systemic or fetal effect.
So the placental transfer and neonatal effects govern opioid choice and dosing in
obstetrics.
What is the rationale and the debate around opioid-free anaesthesia?
Opioid-free anaesthesia seeks to provide anaesthesia and analgesia without
intraoperative opioids, using instead combinations of other agents — local and
regional anaesthesia, paracetamol and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
ketamine, alpha-two agonists such as dexmedetomidine, lidocaine infusions,
magnesium and others — with the aim of avoiding the adverse effects of opioids,
including respiratory depression, nausea, ileus,
opioid-induced hyperalgesia and the risk of persistent postoperative use.
The rationale is strongest where opioid side-effects are especially harmful,
as in the obese with sleep apnoea.
The debate is whether the wholesale removal of opioids is necessary or wise,
since opioids are effective and the multi-drug substitutes carry their own
side-effects, and the evidence that opioid-free technique improves important
outcomes over judicious opioid-sparing multimodal analgesia is not established.
So the mainstream position favours opioid-sparing rather than dogmatically
opioid-free anaesthesia, individualised to the patient.
Summarise the place of the partial agonist buprenorphine in dependence treatment.
Buprenorphine's pharmacology suits it to opioid-dependence treatment.
As a high-affinity partial mu agonist with slow dissociation,
it occupies and blocks the receptor,
blunting the effect of additional full agonists and so reducing the reward from
illicit opioid use, while its partial agonism provides enough effect to suppress
withdrawal and craving with a ceiling that limits respiratory depression and
overdose risk.
It is given sublingually, often combined with naloxone to deter injection,
the naloxone being inactive sublingually but precipitating withdrawal if the
preparation is injected.
A practical point for anaesthesia is that,
because of its high affinity and blocking effect,
a patient maintained on buprenorphine may respond poorly to additional opioids,
requiring planning of perioperative analgesia with regional techniques and
multimodal agents.
So buprenorphine is a mainstay of dependence treatment whose receptor properties
have direct perioperative implications.
Thank you. That was a thorough and well-structured account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Opioids act at G-protein-coupled mu, kappa and delta receptors,
reducing cAMP, opening K+ and closing Ca2+ channels to inhibit nociceptive
transmission peripherally, spinally and supraspinally,
mimicking endogenous endorphins, enkephalins and dynorphins.
Second, Mu-mediated analgesia and respiratory depression are hard to separate;
respiratory depression (reduced CO2 sensitivity) is the lethal effect,
reversed by titrated naloxone — watch for re-narcotisation as it is short-acting.
Third, Know the agents: morphine (active renally-cleared M6G, histamine),
fentanyl (potent, lipophilic, accumulates on infusion),
remifentanil (esterase-metabolised, context-insensitive), pethidine (norpethidine,
MAOI interaction), codeine/tramadol (CYP2D6), buprenorphine (partial agonist,
ceiling), methadone (NMDA, long, QT).
Fourth, Tolerance develops to analgesia and respiratory depression but not to
constipation or miosis; opioid-induced hyperalgesia and dependence/addiction
underlie cautious, lowest-dose use and the move to multimodal,
opioid-sparing analgesia.
Fifth, In renal failure avoid morphine and pethidine (accumulating active/toxic
metabolites), preferring fentanyl or remifentanil;
neuraxial hydrophilic morphine gives prolonged analgesia but risks delayed
respiratory depression.
Thank you. That concludes the station.